
---
title: "CiteScreener: A Pipeline for Citation Verification in Digital Libraries with Datasets"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/JCDL
excerpt: 'A tool to detect irrelevant citations we worked on with the Grenoble team of Nanobubbles.'
date: 2025-12-15
venue: 'ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries JCDL 2025'
paperurl: 'https://zenodo.org/records/14142701](https://hal-bioemco.ccsd.cnrs.fr/LIG_TDCGE_GETALP/hal-05358001v2'
citation: 'Qinyue Liu, Yagmur Ozturk, Tiziri Terkmani, François Portet, Cyril Labbé. CiteScreener: A Pipeline for Citation Verification in Digital Libraries with Datasets. ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries JCDL 2025, Dec 2025, Online, United States. ⟨hal-05358001v2⟩'
---
The growing number of scientific publications in digital formats makes citations important in scientific digital libraries (SDLs) as they are used to record scientific publications. However, unreliable citations, arising from unintentional errors or deliberate manipulation, such as paper mill activity, pose a growing threat to the integrity of scholarly records. These issues can distort query results, inflate or deflate scholarly metrics, and mislead decision-making systems that rely on citation data. To address this challenge, we present CiteScreener, an open-source pipeline designed to automatically assist in estimating citation relevance. Our pipeline integrates citation context extraction, cited literature retrieval, and multi-method citation evaluation (including text overlap techniques and state-of-the-art language models) to detect citations that are irrelevant to the research they reference. We develop and benchmark two datasets to evaluate these methods and select the most effective combination for integration. Finally, we validate the pipeline using real scientific papers to demonstrate its practical applicability. Our work provides SDLs, publishers, and research integrity professionals with a practical assisting tool to enhance citation verification efforts.
